[DO NOT MERGE] Aggregation variables first draft (#9)
davidhassell/cf-conventions: ch02.adoc

An aggregation variable must be a scalar (i.e. it has no dimensions) and the value of its single element is immaterial. It acts as a container for all of the usual attributes that describe the data, with the addition of two special attributes: one that defines the _aggregated dimensions_, i.e. the dimensions of the aggregated data; and one that provides the instructions on how the aggregated data is to be created. The data type of the aggregated data is the same as the data type of the aggregation variable.

Any variable may be an aggregation variable, and being an aggregation variable does not affect its role within CF (i.e. data variable, coordinate variable, boundary variable, cell measure variable, etc.).

The details of how to encode and decode aggregation variables are given in this section, with examples provided in <<appendix-aggregation-examples>>.

> The conventions do not currently offer guidance to dataset creators on how to decide if two or more fragments can be aggregated in this way.

Reviewer: But there are conventions, you're simply saying that they are not internal to _the_ CF conventions?

Author: Yes - "The conventions" means "The CF conventions" (should be explicit about that), and there are multiple external rule-sets for deciding if two or more fragments can be aggregated (xarray, iris, cf-python, Ezequiel's, etc.), but none of them are officially part of CF. All of these rule sets are more or less implementing the same set intuitive rules (e.g. "only things with the same identity and equivalent units can be aggregated"). The [cf-python rules](https://ncas-cms.github.io/cf-python/aggregation_rules.html) that Jonathan and I devised are certainly the most complete, as they are based on the complete CF data model.

See <<example-L.4>> for a CDL representation of this fragment array.
====

The fragment array must be defined by an aggregation variable's **`aggregated_data`** attribute.
This attribute takes a string value comprising blank-separated elements of the form "__feature: variable__", where __feature__ is a case-sensitive keyword that identifies a feature of the fragment array, and __variable__ is a __fragment array variable__ which provides values for that feature. The features and their values unambiguously define the fragment array.
The order of elements in the **`aggregated_data`** attribute is not significant.

The features must comprise either all three of the `shape`, `location`, and `address` keywords; or else both of the `shape` and `value` keywords. No other combinations of keywords are allowed. These features are defined as follows:

// Turn off section numbering for a bit
:numbered!:

===== shape

The integer-valued `shape` fragment array variable defines the shape of each fragment's data in its canonical form (see <<fragment-interpretation>>).

> In general, the `shape` fragment array variable is two-dimensional, with the size of the slower varying dimension (i.e. the number of rows) being the number of fragment array dimensions, and the size of the more rapidly varying dimension (i.e. the number of columns) being the size of the largest fragment array dimension.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In general, the `shape` fragment array variable is two-dimensional, with the size of the slower-varying dimension (i.e. the number of rows) being the number of fragment array dimensions, and the size of the more rapidly-varying dimension (i.e. the number of columns) being the size of the largest fragment array dimension.
```

The `value` fragment array variable dimensions correspond to, and have the same sizes as, the fragment array dimensions in the same order as they appear in the conceptual fragment array.
The `value` fragment array variable may have any data type, and contains each fragment's unique value.
A fragment that contains wholly missing data is specified by any missing value indicated by the aggregation variable.
See <<example-L.7>>, which uses an aggregation ancillary variable to make fragment dataset attributes available to an aggregation data variable.

// Turn section numbering back on
:numbered:

[[fragment-interpretation, Section 2.8.2 "Fragment Interpretation"]]
==== Fragment Interpretation

The data of a fragment must be converted to its __canonical form__ prior to being inserted into the aggregated data. The canonical form of a fragment's data is such that:

* The fragment's data, in its entirety, provide the values for a unique and contiguous part of the aggregated data.

* The fragment's data dimensions correspond to the aggregated dimensions in the same order.

* The fragment's data have the same units as the aggregation variable.

> * The fragment's data are not packed (i.e. not stored using a smaller data type than its original data).

Reviewer 2: Here we are forbidding packing, but in the next paragraph, we seem to just be recommending against it (" It is therefore recommended that the aggregated data is not packed, because of the potential for mistakes and confusion."). We should choose which should be the case and make the text consistent in those two places. And perhaps mention the choice regarding packing in the conformance document.

Reviewer 2: Unless we are talking about two different aspects, but I don't think so?

Author: We're not forbidding that a fragment is packed, rather we're saying that the fragment must be unpacked before being inserted into the aggregated data (just like we're saying that the fragment must have the same number of dimensions as the aggregated data, even if its data array in the file has fewer).

If the aggregation variable indicates packing then this, by definition, applies to the aggregated data - not to the individual fragments from which it is composed. In this case the _unpacked_ fragments are representing _packed_ values in the aggregated data. Hence the recommendation to _not_ have the aggregated data represent packed values - it's confusing and could lead to mistakes.

Reviewer 2: Ah, I see now. OK, thanks for clarifying. I guess this is clear enough in the text now you state it, it is just a lot to get one's head around! Marking as resolved :)

The order of elements in the **`aggregated_data`** attribute is not significant.

There are four standardized and mandatory features, given by the `file`, `format`, `address`, and `shape` keywords; and any amount of non-standardized features are also allowed:

*file*

The string-valued `file` fragment array variable defines the locations of the fragment files.
In general its dimensions correspond to, and have the same sizes as, the fragment array dimensions in the same order as they appear in the conceptual fragment array.
The  `file` fragment array variable values provide the fragment file names.
Each fragment file name must be a Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) <<URI>> that is either an __absolute URI__ (a URI that begins with a scheme component followed by a `:` character, such as `\file://data/file.nc`, `\https://data/file.nc`, and `s3://data/file.nc`), or else a __relative-path URI reference__ (a URI that is not an absolute URI and which does not begin with a `/` or `#` character, such as `file.nc`, `../file.nc`, and `data/file.nc`).
A relative-path URI reference is taken as being relative to the current location of the aggregation file.

> If the aggregation file is moved to another location, then a fragment file identified by an absolute URI will still be accessible, whereas a fragment file identified by a relative-path URI reference will also need be moved to preserve the relative reference.

Author: Hi @bnlawrence  - could you possibly review these three lines?

The terms _absolute URI_ and _relative-path URI reference_ are well defined in the [URI spec](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3986.html) (which is the target of the `<<URI>>` reference). My definitions in parentheses are, I hope, a more consumable distillation of how the URI spec defines them.

Many thanks,
David

Reviewer: I wonder whether you might want to say something like:
> a URI that begins with a scheme component followed by a `:` character, such as `\file://data/file.nc`, `\https://remote.host/data/file.nc`, `s3://remote.host/data/file.nc`,  or`locally_meaningful_protocol://UID`) or else ...)

I would also consider adding the following line. 

Where relative-URI paths are used, data producers are strongly encouraged to use the identifier mechanism to help discriminate between possible targets of lost relative references.

Author: Thanks, Bryan - what is the "identifier mechanism"?

Author: All resolved offline. Text soon to be updated.

It may have any data type.
For a netCDF fragment file, the string-valued address must be the fragment's netCDF variable name.
Addresses for other fragment file formats are allowed, on the understanding that an application program may choose to ignore any values that it does not understand.
See <<example-L.1>> and <<example-L.6>>.

*shape*

The integer-valued `shape` fragment array variable defines the shape of the data of each fragment in its canonical form (see <<fragment-interpretation>>).
In general, the `shape` fragment array variable is two-dimensional, with the size of the slower varying dimension (i.e. the number of rows) being the number of fragment array dimensions, and the size of the more rapidly varying dimension (i.e. the number of columns) being the size of the largest fragment array dimension.
The rows correspond to the fragment array dimensions in the same order, and each row provides the sizes of the fragments along that dimension of the fragment array, padded with missing values if there are fewer fragments than the number of columns.
The sum of non-missing values in a row must therefore equal the size of the corresponding aggregated dimension.

> When the aggregated data is scalar there are no aggregated dimensions, and the `shape` fragment array variable must be one-dimensional and contain only the value `1` (hence be size one).

Author: Hi @sadielbartholomew - not so sure now, as the new text doesn't definitively preclude there being missing values
```suggestion
When the aggregated data is scalar there are no aggregated dimensions, and the `shape` fragment array variable must be one-dimensional, of size one, and contain the value `1`.
```

Reviewer 2: Ah, good point! I didn't realise that, though the text does make it clear (in fairness to me, most people won't be reading the whole new section and appendix dedicated to CFA all at once - there's a lot to take in!). In which case, please ignore this suggestion.

Aggregation provides the utility of being able to view, as a single entity, a dataset that has been partitioned across multiple files, whilst taking up very little space on disk (since the aggregation file contains no copies of the data in the fragments).
The fragment files may be CF-compliant or have any other format, thereby allowing an aggregation variable to act as CF-compliant view of non-CF datasets.
Storing aggregations is useful for data analysis, as it avoids the computational expense of deriving the aggregation at the time of analysis; and for archive curation, as the aggregation can act as a metadata-rich archive index.

An aggregation variable must be a scalar (i.e. it has no dimensions).
It acts as a container for all of the usual attributes that describe the data, with the addition of two special attributes: one that defines the _aggregated dimensions_, i.e. the dimensions of the aggregated data; and one that provides the instructions on how the aggregated data is to be created.
The data type of the aggregation variable must be the data type of the aggregated data, but the value of the aggregation variable's single element is immaterial.

> Aggregation variables may be used as any kind of variable (data variable, coordinate variable, cell measures variable, grid mapping variable, etc.), but it is recommended that container variables whose data are immaterial (such as grid mapping variables) are not encoded as aggregation variables.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Aggregation variables may be used as any kind of variable (data variable, coordinate variable, cell measures variable, etc.), but it is recommended that container variables whose data are immaterial (such as grid mapping variables) are not encoded as aggregation variables.
```

Best not to list the one we go on to advise against using as a possibility first, in my opinion.

Reviewer 2: It still makes sense as-is, though, so no blocker.

The value of the **`aggregated_dimensions`** attribute is a blank separated list of the aggregated dimension names given in the order which matches the dimensions of the aggregated data.
If the aggregated data is scalar then the **`aggregated_dimensions`** attribute must be an empty string.
The aggregated dimensions must exist as dimensions in the aggregation file.

[[aggregated-data, Section 2.8.2, Aggregated Data]]
==== Aggregated Data

The fragments are conceptually organised into a __fragment array__ that has the same number of dimensions as the aggregated data.
Each dimension of the fragment array is called a __fragment array dimension__, and corresponds to the aggregated dimension with the same position in the aggregated data.
The size of a fragment array dimension is equal to the number of fragments that are needed to span its corresponding aggregated dimension.
See <<example-fragment-array>>.

The aggregated data are created by concatenating the fragments' data along each fragment array dimension, and in the order in which they appear in the fragment array.

[[example-fragment-array]]
[caption="Example 2.2. "]

> .A schematic representation of a fragment array for aggregated data

Author: :)

This may be useful when it is known that multiple fragment file locations are possible, but it is not known in advance which of them might exist at any given time.
Each version is expected to contain equivalent information, so that any version whose file exists may be selected for use in the aggregated data.
For instance, providing remotely stored and locally cached versions of the same fragment could allow an application program to only commit to the expense of accessing the remote version if the local version does not exist.
Every fragment must have at least one version, but not all fragments need have the same number of versions.
Where fragments have fewer versions than others, the trailing dimension must be padded with missing values.
See <<example-L.2>>.

*format*

The string-valued `format` fragment array variable defines the format of the fragment files.
In general it must have the same dimensions in the same order as the `file` fragment array variable, and must contain a non-missing value corresponding to each fragment version.
However, if the `format` fragment array variable is a scalar, then its single value is assumed to apply to all fragments.

> The format of a netCDF fragment file must be indicated with the value `nc`.

Author: Hmm, yes, tricky. Thinking as I type ... We need to know the "format" in order to interpret the address. In that sense anything that follows the netCDF API can come under the banner `nc` - be it netCDF3, netCDF4 or netCDF-zarr.

And then there's zarr. The text is obsessed with fragment _files_, but a a zarr dataset isn't a single file, yet we still might want to aggregate zarr datasets. 

This needs more thought. Thanks for the catch.
